ch. xxxi—xxxv] LIVY. 23

b. perversis rupibus, “by, or over, the craggy rocks-'⁸

c. juxta invia ac devia assueti, ‘⁶ accustomed to the
pathless heights and intricate tracks alike.” Invia ae devia
depends upon assueti. Virg. AEn. vi. 833, has a similat
construction: “ ne tanta animis assuescite bella.”

4. infestum agmen faciebant, “made the march danger-
ous.''—infest1im faciebant = infestabant.

6. ne...trud1ixisset, “lest he should find, aster all, that
since he had lost his baggage, lie had brought his army safe
through to no purpose.'' It is not easy to give concisely
the force of the pluperfect and participle.

7. traducti. Hannibal emerged from the defile into the
valley between the Lake Bourget and the Isere. The next
three days led him along the valley of the Isere, on the
right bank. Amold, vol. iii. p. 86.

XXXIV. l. frequentem-Mt inter montanos, “ thickly
populated for mountaineers.” Other editions have inter
montana, “ for a mountain district.''

3. ad fidem promissorum, “ as a pledge for the good
saith of their promises.” Cf. Bk. xxn1„ ch. xii.

4. agmine composito. See ch. xxv. ξ 6, note b.

6. extrema agminis .· the front and rear.

7. quia non. The construction is, “ quia ut ipse erat prae-
sidio equitibus (ab tergo),ita non reliquerat quicquam auxilii
peditibus ab terg0.” Hannibal “had sent forward his cavalry
and baggage, and covered the march with his infantry, who
thus had to sustain the brunt of the attack.'' Arnold, iii.
p. 88.

XXXV. 4. Nono die, “ after they had left the plains of
Dauphinel’ Amold, iii. p. 88.

6. occidente jam sidere Vergiliarum .· περὶ τὴν τῆς Πλεί-
αδος δύσιν, (Pol.)— Vergiliae: the Italian name for the

