fiff

ch. xxvii.—xxxi.] LIVY. 21

5. a. nisi ut, &eq “except to guide his own efforts by the
plans of the enemy.'’

b. integro bello, &eq “having the. war entire before him,
without wasting his strength in other enterprizes.''

6. utique inexpertis, “especially as they had not made
trial.” All report described the Alps as very formidable,
and they had no experience to make them think less of the
dangers they were about to incur in trying to cross them.

XXX. 1. quic-umque Saguntum obsedissent, “all who
had been engaged in the siege of Saguntu1n.’' See ch. vi„
ad fin.

2. a. nunc...subsistere...quid alind credentes, “nom when
their work was almost done, to stop short, wearied at the
very gates of the enemy! why, what else did they think
the Alps were but mountain lieights?”—fingerent‚ “sup-
pose they were‚'' &c-

b. eos ipso.r...legatos,· ch. xxix,

c. nec majores...indige7zas‚ “nor had their aneestors
sprung out of the ground.”

XXXI. 2. adversa ripa .· see ch. xxvii„ note b.

3. a. Isara (Isere). Polyb. iii, 49. 6, Bekker's ed. The
reading “Araris,” which is found in many editions of
Livy, is probably wrong. The isere is one of the chief
branches of the Rhone. It rises in the Pennine Alps
(Great St. Bernard), and after a winding course of 160
miles, joins the Rhone a few miles north os Valenee.

b. incolunt prope Allobroges. This could hardly be said,
if “Araris'' were the reading above; for Hannibal must
have passed through the lands of the Allobroges to reach
the Arar. This is the first time the Allobroges occur in
history: in Caesar their name is frequent enough.

7. a. ad laevam. The point of direction must be, not Han-

