ch. xiv.-—xviii.] LIVY. , 119

4. a. superioribus mis,- the fellow-conspirators of Me-
tellus.

b. equi adempti. Every eques originally received a hoise
from the State (equas publicus), or money to purchase one.
This continued until about the year B.c. 400, after which
there were two classes of equites. (See Dict. of Antiq.,
art. Equites). The knights were subject to the inspection
ofthe censors, who had the power of depriving each of his
horse, and degrading to the condition of an aerarian. (See
below, ch. xliii.) If no fault was found with an eques, he
was desired to pass on (traducere eqztzcm); if otherwise, his
horse was taken from him (equus ademptus), or he was
required to sell it, and refund the price which had been
paid forits purchase to the State.

c. oerarii sacli. The cerarii are always mentioned in
connection with the power of the censors to degrade. There
was no other forin of degradation for a plebeian than that
of becoming an aerarias. But who exactly these cerarii
were is uncertain. It is clear that they did not possess the
right of suffrage; they were, perham, persons who took
up their abode at Rome, and followed for the most part
occupations which were thought degrading.

5. a. vacatio justa, “legal exemption from service,'' such
as age, or siekness, or fulfilment of service, or tenure of
some office.

b. tam tristi censoriae nolte. Some editions have inerti
cen-sorice notae, which would mean that the punishment
inflicted by the censors involved only a loss of privileges,
not the imposition of any additional fine or service.

6. a. locationibus, “ letting out,’' or “receiving contracts
sor.” Locatimzes were of two kinds, locationes rerum, and
locationes operarum. A locatio operarum is the letting out
certain servlces to be fulfilled on certain fixed ternis. He

1

